Attaching segment metadata to a LeRobot v2.1 dataset
====================================================

``opentau.scripts.attach_metadata`` produces a *copy* of a LeRobot v2.1
dataset with three new per-frame parquet columns and two new per-episode
``episodes.jsonl`` fields. Downstream ``LeRobotDataset`` loaders pick
these up automatically and expose them as optional keys in the
:ref:`standard-data-format`.

What it writes
--------------

Given a source dataset at ``--dataset`` and a JSON description of
per-episode segments at ``--annotations``, the script writes the
modified dataset to ``--copy-to``:

*   ``data/chunk-XXX/episode_XXXXXX.parquet`` gains three columns:

    *   ``response`` (``string``) — the current segment's ``subtask`` text.
    *   ``memory``   (``string``) — a cumulative memory summary produced
        by :mod:`opentau.scripts.pi_mem_data_generator` (or a placeholder
        when ``--skip-memory`` is passed).
    *   ``mistake``  (``int64``, 0/1) — ``not segment.success`` for the
        current segment.

*   ``meta/info.json`` gains feature entries for the three new columns.

*   ``meta/episodes.jsonl`` gains ``quality`` (int, 1–5) and
    ``segments`` (list of segment start frame indices) per episode.

*   Stats files (``meta/episodes_stats.jsonl``, ``meta/stats.json``)
    are left untouched — the new columns do not participate in
    normalization.

The script never modifies the source dataset in place. ``--copy-to`` is
required.

Annotations JSON schema
-----------------------

The top-level JSON value is a **list** of episode annotations. Episode
IDs must be a subset-equal match to the dataset's ``episode_index``
values (extras or missing episodes are rejected).

A runnable example lives at
`configs/examples/attach_metadata_annotations.json <https://github.com/TensorAuto/OpenTau/blob/main/configs/examples/attach_metadata_annotations.json>`_.
Its shape, in brief:

.. code-block:: json

    [
      {
        "episode_id": 0,
        "quality": 3,
        "segments": [
          {"start": 0,  "subtask": "approach the cup", "success": false},
          {"start": 50, "subtask": "pick up the cup",  "success": true}
        ]
      },
      {
        "episode_id": 7,
        "quality": 5,
        "segments": [
          {"start": 0, "subtask": "place the block", "success": true}
        ]
      }
    ]

Validation rules (all enforced before any file is written):

*   ``episode_id`` must be an ``int`` and exactly match one dataset
    episode.
*   ``quality`` must be an ``int`` in ``1..5``.
*   ``segments`` must be non-empty.
*   ``segments[0]["start"]`` must equal ``0``.
*   Each ``start`` must be an **integer frame index** (floats are
    rejected to catch "time in seconds" mistakes).
*   Segment starts must be strictly increasing.
*   The last ``start`` must be less than the episode length.
*   ``success`` must be a Python ``bool`` (truthy strings/ints are
    rejected).

``mistake`` is derived as ``not segment.success``; a successful segment
produces ``mistake=0``, a failure produces ``mistake=1``.

Usage
-----

Offline smoke / unit tests (no OpenAI calls, memory column is filled
with the placeholder ``f"memory{frame_index}"``):

.. code-block:: bash

    python -m opentau.scripts.attach_metadata \
        --dataset /path/to/source/dataset \
        --annotations /path/to/annotations.json \
        --copy-to   /path/to/output/dataset \
        --skip-memory

Production run (memory summaries are generated by OpenAI). Place your
key in a ``.env`` at the repo root (or export ``OPENAI_API_KEY``):

.. code-block:: bash

    # .env
    OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-...

    python -m opentau.scripts.attach_metadata \
        --dataset /path/to/source/dataset \
        --annotations /path/to/annotations.json \
        --copy-to   /path/to/output/dataset \
        --model gpt-4o-mini \
        --delay 0.1

Memories are generated **before** any parquet is written, so an OpenAI
failure leaves the destination partially copied but the parquet tree
untouched — rerun with ``--overwrite`` to retry cleanly.

CLI arguments
-------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 28 72

   * - Flag
     - Description
   * - ``--dataset``
     - Required. Path to the source LeRobot v2.1 dataset root.
   * - ``--annotations``
     - Required. Path to the annotations JSON (schema above).
   * - ``--copy-to``
     - Required. Destination dataset root.
   * - ``--overwrite``
     - Optional. Allow clobbering ``--copy-to`` if it already exists.
   * - ``--skip-memory``
     - Optional. Skip OpenAI calls; memory column becomes
       ``f"memory{frame_index}"``. Useful for tests and offline runs.
   * - ``--model``
     - OpenAI chat completion model name. Defaults to
       ``gpt-4o-mini`` (also overridable via ``OPENAI_MODEL``).
   * - ``--delay``
     - Seconds to sleep between OpenAI calls (rate limiting).

Consuming the metadata at training time
---------------------------------------

Once a dataset is annotated, a plain ``LeRobotDataset`` loader reading
from ``--copy-to`` will automatically surface the new columns as
optional keys in the standard data format — no changes to training
code are needed beyond configuring the optional-key dropout
probabilities on ``DatasetMixtureConfig`` (see
:ref:`standard-data-format-optional-keys`).
